Title: Working Parents Adapting to COVID-19 - An Update
Date: 2020-08-11 08:00
Author: markmc
Tags: Personal
Slug: covid19-family-update
Status: published

On March 17, shortly after schools and creches closed in Ireland in an
effort to contain Covid-19, I wrote a post about [how my wife and I
were attempting to
adjust](https://crustyblaa.com/adapting-to-social-distancing-for-covid19.html)
to cope with the need to fit full-time childcare into our already busy
schedules.

After the first 30 days (by mid-April), we needed a serious reset of
our nutrition, exercise, and sleep habits. This stopped the sense of
our lives spiralling out of control. However, the Irish government's
[May 1
announcement](https://www.rte.ie/news/2020/0501/1135923-cabinet/) of
its "roadmap to easing Covid-19 restrictions" put the whole situation
in a new light - we potentially had to continue adapting to a lack of
childcare support for months to come.

As we spent the weekend thinking through our situation, it was clear
to us that the previous plan - working 6 days per week, sharing
full-time childcare - just wasn't sustainable. And, as a business
owner, my wife was under especially intense pressure. Even though I
also had a lot going in work, with somewhat of a change in role in
progress, it seemed like the right time for me to take some time
off. Especially when we imagined looking back on this period in 5
years from now. We decided we must somehow carve out some more time to
focus on our family.

In Ireland, we have a [Parental
leave](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment_rights_and_conditions/leave_and_holidays/parental_leave.html)
entitlement - you can take up 22 weeks unpaid leave for each child
before they are 12 years old. And so, working with my manager, I put
together a plan for me to take 2 weeks leave in every 3 week period
until mid August. We spent some time discussing how to fully offload
my responsibilities and set things up so I could effectively
contribute on my weeks working. I put together a document with a
detailed plan including my schedule for the months ahead, and shared
it with close colleages. Everyone was super supportive. My out of
office would read "out of office, returning on August 17th" but those
close colleagues would understand that I would be returning to work
regularly, looking for ways to contribute.

By the start of June, I had completed my first 2 week period of leave
and 1 super effective week back at work. The plan was working! And so
too was Ireland's containment of Covid-19 working! We were due to move
to ["Phase 2
plus"](https://www.rte.ie/news/2020/0605/1145720-covid-latest-ireland/)
on June 8! I took this as sign that we could start thinking about
re-hiring a nanny for the kids and, sure enough, we found someone
suitable and very local quite quickly.

This meant that one month after turning on my out-of-office, and 2
months before I was due to return to work full-time, I somewhat
embarassingly was able to revert the parental leave plan and life at
home was able to return more-or-less to normal. And life has been
manageable since then.

I decided I should write this update because it's clear that many
others are struggling to understand how to make their situation
sustainable where - elsewhere in the world - they may be facing the
prospect of a return to lockdown restrictions and schools/creches not
reopening for months to come.

There are no easy answers to the conundrum of how to sustainably look
after young children while continuing to work full time. Extended
periods of unpaid leave is a luxury that is not available to
everyone. Employing a fulltime childcare worker in your home is a
luxury that is not available to everyone, or may pose too great an
infection risk for some.

My one piece of advice - use a long-term view to put your situation in
perspective, and be honest with yourself and your colleagues about how
sustainable that situation really is. Certainly, at Red Hat, I felt
confident that everyone around me would instinctively understand the
need to think this way - no matter how pressing our short-term
priorities might be, none of us would want a colleague to put their
family under undue stress, damage their health, or risk burning
themselves out. If you work in a healthy organization, then you can be
sure that the organization can adjust quickly to your absence if needs
be. Trust this fact, lean on it, and talk to your manager about how
you can prioritize yourself and your family.
