Title: My OpenStack Foundation Board Candidacy
Date: 2012-08-20 09:45
Author: markmc
Tags: OpenStack
Slug: my-openstack-foundation-board-candidacy
Status: published

The OpenStack Foundation Board election has begun with [39 excellent
candidates](http://www.openstack.org/election/2012-board-election/candidates/)
for only 8 seats!

Each candidate was asked to answer a number of questions to give an
insight into why they are running for the Board. My answers are below.

If you'd like to know some more about my involvement in OpenStack,
Rackspace recently posted [a nice interview with
me](www.rackspace.com/blog/how-i-contribute-to-openstack-red-hats-mark-mcloughlin/)
as part of their "How I Contribute To OpenStack" series.

**What is your relationship to OpenStack, and why is its success
important to you and/or your company? What would you say is your biggest
contribution to OpenStack's success to date?  
**

I've been involved with OpenStack for just over a year now. I started
out packaging OpenStack for Fedora, but have concentrated mostly on
contributing to the core projects in various ways since then.

I'm a member of the nova-core team and spend quite a bit of time
reviewing proposed changes in gerrit. I'm also the openstack-common PTL
and have been working to kickstart this effort to create a shared
library for all OpenStack projects. My role as PTL recently means that
I'm now a PPB/TC member, but I haven't contributed much there yet.
Finally, I co-ordinate the efforts of the stable-maint and release teams
to maintain a stable branch for OpenStack's core projects and publish
regular bugfix releases.

It's thanks to Red Hat that I have time to make these contributions to
the project and I am the technical lead of Red Hat's OpenStack team.

Red Hat's mission statement is all about being a catalyst in communities
and, while credit must go to others for initially catalysing the
OpenStack community, we recognize the massive strength of OpenStack's
diverse community. This strength is the foundation that will ensure that
OpenStack continues to grow, continues to improve and will be around for
a long time to win. Red Hat is doing everything it can to help make that
happen.

**Describe your experience with other non profits or serving as a board
member. How does your experience prepare you for the role of a board
member?  
**  
I've been heavily involved in various open-source projects for over a
decade now. Observing and pondering the role of non-profit organizations
in open-source projects has prepared me well to participate in the
OpenStack Foundation and its efforts to determine its own particular
role.

Indeed, I participated significantly in the early discussions leading up
to the formation of the Foundation and even proposed a [strawman
Foundation
structure](http://wiki.openstack.org/StrawmanFoundationStructure) based
on my experiences with other similar organizations.

**What do you see as the Board's role in OpenStack's success?**

More importantly, I think, is the role the Foundation will play in
OpenStack's success. I'm a big fan of the Foundation's simple mission
statement - to "protect, empower and promote" OpenStack. It perfectly
encapsulates the role of the Foundation.

The "protecting" and "promoting" elements of the mission are hugely
important, but what I find myself wondering most about is how the
Foundation can "empower" the project. The Foundation can certainly use
some of its budget to fill gaps in the resources which are available to
the project. But, to me, "empowering" the project is mostly about
re-inforcing the understanding that the project's future and direction
lies in the hand of its meritocractic community of contributors (in the
broadest possible sense) and not the Foundation itself.

I think that if the Board delivers on the promise of a Foundation which
"protects, empowers and promotes", we will find ourselves in the
enviable situation of a project with a large and diverse community of
contributors supported by a well-financed organization acting at all
times in the interests of that community.

**What do you think the top priority of the Board should be during the
OpenStack Foundation's first year?  
**  
I think it's the transitioning of responsibilities from Rackspace to the
Foundation will take much of the focus of the Foundation and the Board
in the coming year. The Board will need to appoint an Executive Director
and, in turn, oversee the Executive Director's work to transition the
likes of community management, release management and event
co-ordination to employees of the Foundation.

A huge part of OpenStack's success to date is that functions such as
these have been executed extremely well under Rackspace's management.
The transition to a Foundation is a significant challenge in its own
right and we cannot afford any missteps here. As part of this
transition, I look forward to more open discussion leading up to
decisions made by the Foundation.

I also expect the Board to quickly establish the User Committee and
Legal Affairs Committee. The User Committee will have a hugely important
role to help advocate specific needs of operators and users. The Legal
Affairs Committee will be needed to help us make progress on reforming
our trademark and contributor agreements.

Finally, the Board will have its work cut out finding its feet as the
official voice of OpenStack. The Board will be expected to speak on
behalf of us all and, as such, will need to work hard to build and
reflect consensus within the project.
